<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We now know that these leaves did contain a considerable fragment of that work, if not of that actual copy of it. <a href="canon-alerics-scrap-book.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He died that summer; his daughter married, and settled at St. Papoul. She never understood the circumstances of her father’s “obsession.” <a href="canon-alerics-scrap-book.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>I.e.</i>, The Dispute of Solomon with a demon of the night. Drawn by Alberic de Mauléon. <i>Versicle</i>. O Lord, make haste to help me. <i>Psalm</i>. Whoso dwelleth (xci.).</p>
					<p>Saint Bertrand, who puttest devils to flight, pray for me most unhappy. I saw it first on the night of Dec. 12, 1694: soon I shall see it for the last time. I have sinned and suffered, and have more to suffer yet. Dec. 29, 1701.</p>
					<p>The “Gallia Christiana” gives the date of the Canon’s death as December 31, 1701, “in bed, of a sudden seizure.” Details of this kind are not common in the great work of the Sammarthani. <a href="canon-alerics-scrap-book.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mr. Rogers was wrong, <i>vide Dombey and Son</i>, chapter xii. <a href="oh-whistle-and-ill-come-to-you-my-lad.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An account of the Premonstratensian abbey of Steinfeld, in the Eiffel, with lives of the Abbots, published at Cologne in 1712 by Christian Albert Erhard, a resident in the district. The epithet <i>Norbertinum</i> is due to the fact that St. Norbert was founder of the Premonstratensian Order. <a href="the-treasure-of-abbot-thomas.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>There is a place for gold where it is hidden. <a href="the-treasure-of-abbot-thomas.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>They have on their raiment a writing which no man knoweth. <a href="the-treasure-of-abbot-thomas.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Upon one stone are seven eyes. <a href="the-treasure-of-abbot-thomas.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Keep that which is committed to thee.” <a href="the-treasure-of-abbot-thomas.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apparently the ichneumon fly (<i>Ophion obscurum</i>), and not the true sawfly, is meant. <a href="the-residence-at-whitminster.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
